Introduction
Human Resource Management (HRM) was once primarily an administrative department that handled everyday admin tasks and ensured people were paid on time. However, today, the role of HRM has changed drastically. Today, HRM is part of the core business unit, and HRM strategies and solutions directly impact the organisation's growth, sustenance, and profitability.

For 2023, HR experts and CXOs will be focusing on improving their strategic Human Resource Management processes so that they can set more ambitious goals for the organisation. 

What is strategic Human Resource Management?
Strategic Human Resource Management (SHRM) is a set of processes and solutions to align the employees' efforts towards achieving greater organisational goals. With strategic HRM, the goal will be to create policies and programs that align with the organisational strategy.

Strategic HRM has to be proactive and flexible. The strategies need to be tweaked as business goals change over time. In most organisations, top HR leaders are also part of business decisions, making it easy to make ground-level changes in their HR processes. 

Importance of Strategic Human Resource Management (SHRM)
A workforce is the biggest asset for any organisation, so it makes sense to strategise HRM efforts so the workforce can effectively and appropriately contribute to the organisation’s growth. 

Building change-ready workplace
Agility is a skill that is very important in today’s scenario. An organisation’s goal could change depending on external factors like supply and demand, competition, and political scenarios. As the organisation’s goals change, the workforce must also change its strategies. 

SHRM helps build an agile workforce that can quickly adapt to changing needs and keep contributing optimally and effectively. 

Delegating the right job to the right person
SHRM affects all sub-categories of human resource management and optimises them. With SHRM processes, HR managers can have a futuristic idea of how the organisation will grow and manage the existing workforce accordingly. 

Promotions and internal moves can be based on which direction the organisation plans to take instead of just present decisions. Also, SHRM solutions can help retain the right talent that can help achieve the organisation’s goals in the coming quarters.

Improving employee engagement
A Gallup poll states that disengaged employees cost organisations $450-$500 billion annually! The importance of Strategic Human Resource Management (SHRM) goes as far as to improve employee engagement and productivity at the workplace.

Here is how SHRM helps with employee engagement

It gives a clear sense of direction to employees.
It has plans to recognise and reward employees at the right time.
SHRM promotes transparent and open communication.
It helps employees understand organisational needs and act accordingly.
Employee training and development
Training and development are essential parts of managing the workforce. Technology keeps changing daily, and your employees' skills may become redundant if they are not upgraded.

SHRM understands current training and development needs. The organisation plans to shift its processes to the cloud in the next 12 months. It makes sense to start training employees to handle cloud platforms to prepare them for the transition. By strategically allocating Learning and development budgets to goal-appropriate skills, you can optimise the funds and make more value out of them.

Optimising human resource utilisation
One of the most important reasons organisations must focus on Strategic Human Resource Management is to have a smart plan for managing the workforce. It is easy to make smart decisions by the HR team when they plan strategically. 

Some of the other factors highlighting the importance of strategic human resource management (SHRM) are:

Brings employees and management closer.
Helps employees understand organisational goals.
Helps in creating a positive work culture that ensures high employee retention. 
High efficiency in hiring resourceful talents that contributes towards organizational growth. 
Ensures the management invests in the right strategies and solutions.
Addresses critical issues before they blow up.
Helps create appropriate training and learning solutions.
Helps the organisation make optimal use of the existing workforce.
How Does SHRM Work?
Strategic Human Resource Management is a framework that helps tighten existing HR processes and connect them with the overall organisational needs and goals. All organisations have an HR team and HR processes in place. However the success of SHRM depends on the overall response of the management and the workforce. 

The exciting thing about Strategic Human Resource Management is that it is unique for each workplace and needs to be built based on what works and what doesn’t for the workplace.

Many top institutions in the country offer human resource management courses focusing specifically on SHRM. These courses will help students learn the basic and advanced concepts of SHRM and help them build successful strategies for different scenarios.

Objectives of Strategic Human Resource Management
The main goals of strategic HRM are to address issues including organisational culture, hierarchy, operational effectiveness, resource-role matching, and performance issues. Five main goals should be the focus of SHRM strategies:

Resource-based Strategy: Emphasises strengthening the organisation's strategic strengths.
Improved commitment between managers and their staff is achieved through high-commitment management.
Achieving Strategic Fit: Integration of human capital and material resources using a lean, highly ROI-focused operational paradigm
High Involvement Management: Treating staff members like stakeholders and empowering them.
High-Performance Management: Improving business performance through increased employee productivity, growth, and profitability.
Scope of Strategic Human Resource Management
The scope and importance of Strategic Human Resource Management (SHRM) is beyond everyday HR activities. SHRM affects every segment of HR, and the changes, in turn, affect the organisation's overall functioning over time. The following are some of the segments that Strategic Human Resource Management can affect.

Human capital management.
Business strategies and decisions.
Business performance.
Overall revenues generated.
Business work culture.
People analytics.
Conclusion
Strategic Human Resource Management will be the future that HR experts are excited about. HR management must be taken seriously because it directly affects every single part of the business. If an organisation does not work on aligning its business and HR brains, it won’t be able to progress and make a mark.