Environment Animals
MEGAPIXELS: For a technicolor nightmare, see this fish in high definition
New imaging techniques straight out of a horror movie.

BY CHARLIE WOOD | PUBLISHED SEP 27, 2018 2:00 AM EDT

ENVIRONMENT

SHARE    
Announcing all-new, high definition nightmares, brought to you by researchers at the University of Kansas, where biologists have developed new techniques to pose and image certain animals.

The ability to compare vertebrate skeletons in excruciating detail is important for anatomists and taxonomists who need to note minuscule differences for their research. Traditionally they’ve gone about this work by “staining” the bones with dyes, and “clearing” out most of the muscle tissue by dissolving it with a digestive enzyme. You wind up with a colorful but floppy specimen with see-through skin—ready for its close-up.

The new methods supercharge that process by creating the option to pose the creature. After a year of trial and error, a biologist-taxidermist duo cooked up a concoction of gelatin and glycerine that sets slowly enough to suspend your stained-and-cleared specimen in the gel and get your tools (and fingers) out of the way with time to spare. It’s basically Jim Halpert’s dream technology.

Arranging specimens freely will let biologists get clear shots of hard-to-photograph body parts (like the second pair of jaws at the back of a fish’s throat), but that’s only half the story. One of the dyes used to stain the animals shines bright red when exposed to certain types of light. “It fluoresces like a Grateful Dead poster,” evolutionary biologist W. Leo Smith said in a press release. Photographs using normal light can blur fine features, but the red fluorescence produces sharp pictures that will, for better or for worse, etch every last detail into your memory. Sweet dreams!

ANIMALS
MEGAPIXELS

Conversation
Your voice matters. Conversations are moderated for civility. Read the community guidelines here.


Log in

Sign up


No one seems to have shared their thoughts on this topic yet
Leave a comment so your voice will be heard first.
Powered by
TermsPrivacyFeedback
Like science, tech, and DIY projects?

Sign up to receive Popular Science's emails and get the highlights.

Popular Science
LINKS

Home About Popular Science Newsletter Sign-up How We Test & Review Products Editorial Standards Contact Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Sitemap DepositPhotos Affiliate Disclosure
Cookies Settings
FOLLOW US

    
DISCLAIMER(S)

Articles may contain affiliate links which enable us to share in the revenue of any purchases made.

Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Service.

© 2023 Recurrent. All rights reserved.

